---
layout:     post
title:      “Open Source, Open Science” Meeting Report – March 2015
date:       2015-03-24 19:08
summary:    Open Science has emerged into the mainstream, primarily due to concerted efforts from various individuals, institutions, and initiatives. This small, focused gathering brought together several of those community leaders.
comments:   True
published:  True
tags:       ['open science', 'cos']
categories: ['open science']
---

*This is a co-authored blog post that has been cross-posted*

On March 19th and 20th, the [Center for Open Science](http://cos.io/)
hosted a small meeting in Charlottesville, VA, convened by COS and
co-organized by Kaitlin Thaney ([Mozilla Science
Lab](http://www.mozillascience.org/)) and Titus Brown (UC Davis).
People working across the open science ecosystem attended, including
publishers, infrastructure non-profits, public policy experts, community
builders, and academics.

Open Science has emerged into the mainstream, primarily due to concerted
efforts from various individuals, institutions, and initiatives. This
small, focused gathering brought together several of those community
leaders. The purpose of the meeting was to define common goals, discuss
common challenges, and coordinate on common efforts.

We had good discussions about several issues at the intersection of
technology and social hacking including badging, improving standards for
scientific APIs, and developing shared infrastructure. We also talked
about coordination challenges due to the rapid growth of the open
science community. At least three collaborative projects emerged from
the meeting as concrete outcomes to combat the coordination challenges.

A repeated theme was how to make the value proposition of open science
more explicit. Why should scientists become more open, and why should
institutions and funders support open science? We agreed that incentives
in science are misaligned with practices, and we identified particular
pain points and opportunities to nudge incentives. We focused on
providing information about the benefits of open science to researchers,
funders, and administrators, and emphasized reasons aligned with each
stakeholders' interests. We also discussed industry interest in "open",
both in making good use of open data, and also in participating in the
open ecosystem. One of the collaborative projects emerging from the
meeting is a paper or papers to answer the question “Why go open?” for
researchers.

Many groups are providing training for tools, statistics, or workflows
that could improve openness and reproducibility. We discussed methods of
coordinating training activities, such as a training "decision tree"
defining potential entry points and next steps for researchers. For
example, Center for Open Science offers statistics consulting, rOpenSci
offers training on tools, and Software Carpentry, Data Carpentry, and
Mozilla Science Lab offer training on workflows. A federation of
training services could be mutually reinforcing and bolster collective
effectiveness, and facilitate sustainable funding models.

The challenge of supporting training efforts was linked to the larger
challenge of funding the so-called "glue" - the technical infrastructure
that is only noticed when it fails to function. One such collaboration
is the SHARE project, a partnership between the Association of Research
Libraries, its academic association partners, and the Center for Open
Science. There is little glory in training and infrastructure, but both
are essential elements for providing knowledge to enable change, and
tools to enact change.

Another repeated theme was the "open science bubble". Many participants
felt that they were failing to reach people outside of the open science
community. Training in data science and software development was
recognized as one way to introduce people to open science. For example,
data integration and techniques for reproducible computational analysis
naturally connect to discussions of data availability and open source.
Re-branding was also discussed as a solution - rather than "post
preprints!", say "get more citations!" Another important realization was
that researchers who engage with open practices need not, and indeed may
not want to, self-identify as "open scientists" per se. The identity and
behavior need not be the same.

A number of concrete actions and collaborative activities emerged at the
end, including a more coordinated effort around badging, collaboration
on API connections between services and producing an article on best
practices for scientific APIs, and the writing of an opinion paper
outlining the value proposition of open science for researchers. While
several proposals were advanced for "next meetings" such as hackathons,
no decision has yet been reached. But, a more important decision was
clear - the open science community is emerging, strong, and ready to
work in concert to help the daily scientific practice live up to core
scientific values.

### People

1.  [*Tal Yarkoni*](http://talyarkoni.org), University of Texas at Austin

2.  [*Kara Woo*](http://karawoo.com/), [*NCEAS*](https://www.nceas.ucsb.edu/)

3.  [*Andrew Updegrove*](http://gesmer.com/team.php?PeopleID=67), [*Gesmer Updegrove*](http://gesmer.com/home.php) and [*ConsortiumInfo.org*](http://www.consortiuminfo.org/)

4.  [*Kaitlin Thaney*](http://twitter.com/kaythaney), [*Mozilla Science Lab*](http://mozillascience.org)

5.  [*Jeffrey Spies*](http://twitter.com/jeffspies), [*Center for Open Science*](http://cos.io)

6.  [*Courtney Soderberg*](https://twitter.com/cksoderberg), [*Center for Open Science*](http://centerforopenscience.org)

7.  [*Elliott Shore, Association of Research Libraries*](http://www.arl.org/)

8.  [*Andrew Sallans*](https://twitter.com/asallans), Center for Open Science

9.  [*Karthik Ram*](https://twitter.com/_inundata), [*rOpenSci*](http://ropensci.org/) and Berkeley Institute for Data Science

10. [*Min Ragan-Kelley*](https://github.com/minrk), [*IPython*](http://ipython.org/) and UC Berkeley

11. [*Brian Nosek*](http://briannosek.com/), [*Center for Open Science*](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fcos.io%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGXtd1kKGcldQoNn3-3sGmMfpRqfw) and University of Virginia

12. [*Erin C. McKiernan*](https://emckiernan.wordpress.com/), Wilfrid Laurier University

13. [*Jennifer Lin*](https://twitter.com/jenniferlin15), [*PLOS*](http://www.plos.org/)

14. [*Amye Kenall*](https://twitter.com/AmyeKenall), [*BioMed Central*](http://www.biomedcentral.com/)

15. [*Mark Hahnel*](https://twitter.com/markhahnel), [*figshare*](http://figshare.com/)

16. [*C. Titus Brown, UC Davis*](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/)

17. [*Sara D. Bowman*](https://osf.io/d9ehg/), [*Center for Open Science*](http://cos.io)
